Add native adaptive gc policy switch blog post (#1607)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2023-01-16-native-adopts-adaptive-gc-policy.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Quarkus Native adopts Adaptive GC policy'
date: 2023-01-16
tags: native gc
synopsis: 'Native runtime GC policy switches to adaptive to more consistency and predictability'
author: galderz
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/gc-policy-adaptive-switch

Starting with Quarkus 2.13.6.Final, the native runtime garbage collection policy switched in order to provide more consistent and predictable runtime performance.

> This blog tells the story of this switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog post tells the story of this switch.
```

2023-01-09 13:29:32,155 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) quarkus-project 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 2.15.2.Final) started in 0.017s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
...
[Heap policy parameters:
  YoungGenerationSize: 268435456
      MaximumHeapSize: 27487790640
      MinimumHeapSize: 536870912 <--
     AlignedChunkSize: 1048576
  LargeArrayThreshold: 131072]
----

We realized that this number is actually 512MB,
which is the default minimum heap size GraalVM configures when the maximum heap size is anything above ~3GB of physical memory.

The next question was,
why is there a relationship between the minimum heap size and the memory consumption at which a full GC appears to happen?
Looking at the output above,
on our system the default maximum heap size is 25.6GB.
GraalVM defaults the maximum heap size to 80% of the physical memory if no specific configuration is passed, and indeed 25.6GB is 80% of 32GB.
It would seem odd to do a full GC when 512MB have been consumed,
given that our system has given it a maximum heap size that is far bigger.
The answer was found in the GC policy Quarkus was explicitly configuring.

> By default GraalVM configures a GC policy called "adaptive",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default GraalVM uses a GC policy called "adaptive",
```

The "by space and time" GC policy implemented a `shouldCollectCompletely` method that decided whether to do a complete (full) or incremental (minimal) collection.
The relevant code of the "by space and time" GC policy is the following:

[source,java]
----
return estimateUsedHeapAtNextIncrementalCollection().aboveThan(getMaximumHeapSize()) // (1)
  || GCImpl.getChunkBytes().aboveThan(getMinimumHeapSize()) && enoughTimeSpentOnIncrementalGCs(); // (2)
----

One option `(1)` for doing a full GC would be when it estimates that the used heap will exceed maximum heap size,
but that wasn’t our case.
The other `(2)` would be if enough minimal collections had happened and the used heap was above the minimum heap size.
This latter option was what was happening here.

At this point we thought,
do the assumptions made about the default GC policy still apply in 2022?
So, we removed the GC policy configuration tweak,
repeated the test and we observed the following memory consumption:

image::adaptive-memory-consumption.png[]

For the same workload the default GC policy, called "adaptive",
consumed close to 50% less heap compared to the "by space and time" one.

> Note, however, that these graphs alone are not enough to make the switch since we could have a situation where adaptive is using less memory because the overall throughput is less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, however, that these graphs alone are not enough to make the switch since we could have a situation where "adaptive" is using less memory because the overall throughput is less.
```

So getting pretty much the same throughput with "adaptive" as with "by space and time" and close to 50% less memory consumption,
made it a pretty convincing argument to switch to the "adaptive" GC policy as the default for Quarkus,
as it was already the case for other GraalVM.

IMPORTANT: The memory consumption benefits do not apply evenly across all heap sizes.
Numbers like the ones published in this blog post would apply for maximum heap sizes that are equal or above 3GB,
at which stage the default minimum heap size is set to ~512MB unless configured otherwise.
For smaller maximum heap sizes, the memory consumption improvements might be smaller or non-existent.

We often see tests or benchmarks run with no `-Xmx` configured,
in which case as stated above,
the maximum heap size is set to 80% of the available physical memory and this heap size can easily exceed 3GB on modern hardware.
These users would see better out of the box experience with the "adaptive" GC policy.

So, starting with Quarkus 2.13.6.Final, the GC policy for Quarkus native applications was aligned with GraalVM's default, called "adaptive".

> It is still possible to set the GC policy back to space/time, should that work better in a specific case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is still possible to set the GC policy back to "by space and time", should that work better in a specific case.
```

---
layout: post
title: 'Quarkus Native adopts Adaptive GC policy'
date: 2023-01-16
tags: native gc
synopsis: 'Native runtime GC policy switches to adaptive to more consistency and predictability'
author: galderz
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/gc-policy-adaptive-switch

> Starting with Quarkus 2.14.0.Final, native runtime garbage collection policy switched in order to provide more consistent and predictable runtime performance.

Reviewer 2: I'd also "the" before "native runtime garbage collection policy".

> Starting with Quarkus 2.14.0.Final, native runtime garbage collection policy switched in order to provide more consistent and predictable runtime performance.

Reviewer: Added to my suggestion.

This feature has only been available in the GraalVM Community Edition starting with version 22.3.0.
See
https://www.graalvm.org/latest/tools/visualvm[here]
for more details.

The graph looked suspicious.
At a first glance, small garbage collections were happening regularly but those collections were not able to fully collect all the garbage.
This uncollected garbage would continue to grow until around the 500MB mark, at which point a full garbage collection would happen and it would clear the growing leak.

The first thing we wondered was,
what this ~500MB limit was and where it was coming from.
To do that,
we enabled GC logging to see if we could get some clues:

[source,bash]
----
$ quarkus-project/target/quarkus-project-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -XX:+PrintGC -XX:+VerboseGC
2023-01-09 13:29:32,155 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) quarkus-project 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 2.15.2.Final) started in 0.017s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
...
[Heap policy parameters:
  YoungGenerationSize: 268435456
      MaximumHeapSize: 27487790640
      MinimumHeapSize: 536870912 <--
     AlignedChunkSize: 1048576
  LargeArrayThreshold: 131072]
----

> Looking at the output we quickly realized that this number is actually 512MB,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We realized that this number is actually 512MB,
```

> which is actually the default minimum heap size GraalVM configures when the maximum heap size is anything above ~3GB of physical memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which is the default minimum heap size GraalVM configures when the maximum heap size is anything above ~3GB of physical memory.
```

The next question was,
why is there a relationship between the minimum heap size and the memory consumption at which a full GC appears to happen?
Looking at the output above,
on our system the default maximum heap size is 25.6GB.

> GraalVM defaults maximum heap size to 80% of the physical memory if no specific configuration is passed and indeed 25.6GB is 80% of 32GB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GraalVM defaults the maximum heap size to 80% of the physical memory if no specific configuration is passed, and indeed 25.6GB is 80% of 32GB.
```

It would seem odd to do a full GC when 512MB have been consumed,
given that our system has given it a maximum heap size that is far bigger.
The answer was found in the GC policy Quarkus was explicitly configuring.

> By default GraalVM configures a GC policy called adaptive,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default GraalVM configures a GC policy called "adaptive",
```

> but Quarkus was instead instructing GraalVM to use a “by space and time” GC policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but Quarkus was instead instructing GraalVM to use another GC policy called "by space and time".
```

The full story on why Quarkus was using a different GC policy can be found
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/28267[here],
but to summarize,

> the decision was made in 2018 to use an alternative GC policy that generated less full GCs and offered considerably better throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the decision was made in 2018, when "by space and time" appeared to generate less full GCs and offered considerably better throughput.
```

> The space/time GC policy implemented a `shouldCollectCompletely` method that decided whether to do a complete (full) or incremental (minimal) collection.
> The relevant code of the space/time GC policy is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "by space and time" GC policy implemented a `shouldCollectCompletely` method that decided whether to do a complete (full) or incremental (minimal) collection.
The relevant code of the "by space and time" GC policy is the following:
```

[source,java]
----
return estimateUsedHeapAtNextIncrementalCollection().aboveThan(getMaximumHeapSize()) // (1)
  || GCImpl.getChunkBytes().aboveThan(getMinimumHeapSize()) && enoughTimeSpentOnIncrementalGCs(); // (2)
----

One option `(1)` for doing a full GC would be when it estimates that the used heap will exceed maximum heap size,
but that wasn’t our case.
The other `(2)` would be if enough minimal collections had happened and the used heap was above the minimum heap size.
This latter option was what was happening here.

At this point we thought,
do the assumptions made about the default GC policy still apply in 2022?
So, we removed the GC policy configuration tweak,
repeated the test and we observed the following memory consumption:

image::adaptive-memory-consumption.png[]

> For the same workload the default GC policy, called adaptive,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the same workload the default GC policy, called "adaptive",
```

> would seem to consume close to 50% less heap compared to the space/time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consumed close to 50% less heap compared to the "by space and time" one.
```

> Obviously, these graphs alone are not enough to make the switch since we could have a situation where adaptive is using less memory because the overall throughput is less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, however, that these graphs alone are not enough to make the switch since we could have a situation where adaptive is using less memory because the overall throughput is less.
```

This might not be obvious to everyone :)

> So, let’s look at the details of the benchmark that generated the graphs above and see what throughput numbers we obtain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, let’s look at the benchmark that generated the graphs above and see what throughput numbers we obtain.
```

Using https://github.com/Hyperfoil/Hyperfoil[Hyperfoil],

> space/time policy reported these numbers on our environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the "by space and time" policy reported these numbers on our environment:
```

[source,bash]
----
[hyperfoil@in-vm]$ wrk -t 128 -c 512 -H 'accept: text/plain' -d 16m http://<host>:8080/hello
PHASE        METRIC   THROUGHPUT    REQUESTS  ... TIMEOUTS  ERRORS  BLOCKED   2xx
test         request  93.79k req/s  90036541  ...        0       0      0 ns  90036094
----

> And here are the numbers for adaptive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And here are the numbers for the "adaptive" policy:
```

[source,bash]
----
[hyperfoil@in-vm]$ wrk -t 128 -c 512 -H 'accept: text/plain' -d 16m http://<host>:8080/hello
PHASE        METRIC   THROUGHPUT    REQUESTS  ... TIMEOUTS  ERRORS  BLOCKED   2xx
test         request  93.05k req/s  89329151  ...         0       0     0 ns  89328711
----

NOTE: The results were obtained with `wrk`,
which is known to have issues with latency numbers
(see https://redhatperf.github.io/post/coordinated-omission[this blog post] for more details),
so we can ignore those in the context of this blog post and focus on throughput numbers.

For the same workload,

> adaptive throughput is within 1% of the one obtained with space/time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the throughput obtained with the "adaptive" policy is within 1% of the one obtained with the "by space and time" policy.
```

> So getting pretty much the same throughput with adaptive as with space/time and close to 50% less memory consumption,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So getting pretty much the same throughput with "adaptive" as with "by space and time" and close to 50% less memory consumption,
```

> made it a pretty convincing argument to switch to adaptive as default GC policy for Quarkus,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
made it a pretty convincing argument to switch to the "adaptive" GC policy as the default for Quarkus,
```

as it was already the case for other GraalVM.

IMPORTANT: The memory consumption benefits do not apply evenly across all heap sizes.
Numbers like the ones published in this blog post would apply for maximum heap sizes that are equal or above 3GB,
at which stage the default minimum heap size is set to ~512MB unless configured otherwise.
For smaller maximum heap sizes, the memory consumption improvements might be smaller or non-existent.

We often see tests or benchmarks run with no `-Xmx` configured,
in which case as stated above,

> the maximum heap size is set to 80% of the available physical memory and this heap size can easily exceed 3GB in modern hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the maximum heap size is set to 80% of the available physical memory and this heap size can easily exceed 3GB on modern hardware.
```

> These users would see better out of the box experience with adaptive GC policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These users would see better out of the box experience with the "adaptive" GC policy.
```

> So, starting with Quarkus 2.14.Final, the GC policy in Quarkus was aligned with GraalVM to be adaptive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, starting with Quarkus 2.13.6.Final, the GC policy for Quarkus native applications was aligned with GraalVM's default, called "adaptive".
```

> Even with this change,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> it is still possible to set the GC policy back to space/time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is still possible to set the GC policy back to space/time, should that work better in a specific case.
```

Reviewer: Also consider `space/time` -> `"by space and time"` for consistency.
